---
id: 7piz83dbn29ibv5ewkfjiyb
title: A quick survey of the last two millennia
desc: ''
updated: 1753630439216
created: 1752940796999
---

# Fermat, Wiles, and the father of Algebra

This section summarizes the story of Fermat Last Theorem, which exemplifies how the search of solutions for diophantine equations have driven the pursue of mathematical knowledge.

# Quadratic equations

The solution of an equation depends on the number system in which we want to solve it.

## Diophantus Chord Method

Assume we know the solution to an equation over the rationals. We can trace a chord from the known solution and find intersections with the graph of the equation. The method is very well illustrated by finding pythagorean triples.  

### When does the method work?

## Return to quadratic equations

### Theorem
Suppose $a$, $b$, and $c$ are non-zero rational numbers. if the equation $ax^2+by^2=c$ has one rational solution, it has infinitely many, and each soltuion provides an infinite family of integer solutions to the equation $ax^2+by^2=cz^2$

### How can we determine the existence of one solution?

### The lack of integer soltuions does not preclude the existence of rational solutions

For example, $43=x^2+26y^2$ has rational solutions but not integer solutions


# Diophantine Equations

A **diophantine equation** is a polynomial equation over the integers.

### What number of marbles can be arranged as both flat squares, and square pyramids?

## Elliptic curves

An **elliptic curve** $E$ over $\mathbb{Q}$ is an equation of the form 

$$
y^2=x^3+sx+t
$$

Given a line crossing two rational points there is a third rational point intersecting the line.

## Euler Bricks

An **Euler Brick** is a rectangular prism in which the sides and the diagonals of each face are all integers

## Yet another equation

$$
x^3+y^3+z^3=n
$$

Solutions for $n=41$ and $n=43$ are not too hard to find, but solution for $n=42$ are not easy to find.