---
id: rc807e5t9xg19mw9mksp6x4
title: The fundamental theorem of arithmetic
desc: ''
updated: 1753715400815
created: 1753713425439
---

# A handwavy version

Every natural number $n>1$ can be written uniquely in the form $n=p_1 p_2 \cdots p_k$ where $p_1 \leq p_2 \leq \cdots \leq p_k$ are prime numbers.

How can we generalize this statement to other number systems?

# Units

Consider a ring $R$ with unity. A **unit** is an element $u \in R$ such that there is an element $c \in R$ such that $cu=uc=1$. In a commutative ring, this is equivalent to say that $u \mid 1$.

# Associates

We say that $r_1, r_2 \in R$ are **associates** if there is a unit $u \in R$ such that $r_1=u r_2$.

Is this the same as saying $r_1 \mid r_2$ and $r_2 \mid r_1$?

# Prime

We say that a number $p\in R$ is **prime** if its only divisors are units and associates of $p$. Otherwise, we say that $p$ is composite.

Perhaps, it would be best to call a number satisfying this property **irreducible** since that would be more in line with standard algebraic terminology for rings.

# Fundamental theorem of arithmetic in $\mathbb{Z}$

Every non-zero integer $n \in \mathbb{Z}$ can be written in the form 

$$
n = u p_1\cdots p_k
$$

where $k$ is a non-negative integer, $u$ is a unit, and $p_1,\dots, p_k$ are prime numbers. Moreover, this representation is unique up to reordering and associates.

The proof of existence of the factorization proceeds by strong induction and the definition of prime number. The proof of uniqueness uses the following lemma.

## Lemma

For $b,c \in \mathbb{Z}$, if $p$ is prime with $p \mid bc$ then $p \mid b$ or $p \mid c$

The proof uses Euclid's lemma

### Euclid's lemma 
For $a, b, c \in \mathbb{Z}$, if $\gcd(a,b)=1$ and $a \mid bc$ then $a \mid c$

For the proof of euclid's lemma, use Bezout's identity on $a$ and $b$.

## Corollary

For $a_1,\dots, a_n \in \mathbb{Z}$, and $p \in \mathbb{Z}$ prime. If $p \mid a_1 \cdots a_n$ then $p \mid a_i$ for some $a_i$

## Corollary
Let $p \in \mathbb{Z}$ be prime. For $n \in \mathbb{N}$, if $p \mid a^n$ then $p \mid a$.

## Corollary
If $p \in \mathbb{Z}$ is prime, then $\sqrt{p}$ is irrational.

